.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-TCPCLIENT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-tcpclient
.Nd UCSPI client tool[1] for INET domain sockets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q | Fl Q | Fl v
.Op Fl 4 | Fl 6
.Op Fl d | Fl D
.Op Fl r | Fl R
.Op Fl h | Fl H
.Op Fl n | Fl N
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl l Ar localname
.Op Fl T Ar timeoutconn
.Op Fl i Ar localip
.Op Fl p Ar localport
.Ar host
.Ar port
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
establishes a TCP connection to a server, then executes into a
program.
.Pp
.Nm
establishes a TCP connection to host
.Ar host
port
.Ar port .
.Pp
It executes into
.Ar prog...
with descriptor 6 reading from the network and descriptor 7 writing to
it.
.Ss Host address determination
.Ar host
may be an IP address, in which case
.Nm
will connect to that IP address.
If the underlying skalibs has been compiled with IPv6 support,
.Ar host
can be an IPv6 address as well as an IPv4 one.
.Pp
.Ar host
may be a domain name, in which case a DNS resolution will be performed
on it, and a connection will be tried to all the resulting IP
addresses in a round-robin fashion, twice: first with a small timeout,
then with a longer timeout.
The first address to answer wins.
The connection attempt fails if no address in the list is able to
answer.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl q
Be quiet.
.It Fl Q
Be normally verbose.
This is the default.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
.It Fl 4
(Only valid if the underlying skalibs has IPv6 support) Interpret
.Ar host
as an IPv4 address or make A queries to determine its addresses.
.It Fl 6
(Only valid if the underlying skalibs has IPv6 support) Interpret
.Ar host
as an IPv6 address or make AAAA queries to determine its addresses.
This option and the previous one are not mutually exclusive: if both
are given, both IPv6 and IPv4 addresses will be tried and IPv6
addresses will be given priority.
If neither option is given, only IPv4 address will be tried.
.It Fl d
Don't use the
.Dv TCP_NODELAY
socket option.
This is the default.
.It Fl D
Use the
.Dv TCP_NODELAY
socket option, which disables Nagle's algorithm.
.It Fl r
Try and obtain a
.Ev TCPREMOTEINFO
string via the IDENT protocol.
This is obsolete and unreliable, and should only be used for
compatibility with legacy programs.
.It Fl R
Do not use the IDENT protocol.
This is the default.
.It Fl h
Try and obtain the remote host name via DNS.
This is the default.
.It Fl H
Do not try and obtain the remote host name via DNS.
.It Fl n
Qualify
.Ar host
when resolving it to find suitable IP addresses.
This is the default.
.It Fl N
Do not qualify
.Ar host .
.It Fl t Ar timeout
Put a global timeout on the connection attempt.
If no fully functional connection has been established after
.Ar timeout
seconds, abort the program.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no timeout.
.It Fl i Ar localip
Use
.Ar localip
as the local socket address for the connection.
By default, address selection is left to the operating system.
.It Fl p Ar localport
Use
.Ar localport
as the local socket port for the connection.
By default, port selection is left to the operating system.
.It Fl l Ar localname
Use
.Ar localname
as the value of the
.Ev TCPLOCALPATH
environment variable instead of looking it up via the DNS.
.It Fl T Ar timeoutconn
Configure the connection timeouts.
.Ar timeoutconn
must be of the form
.Ql Ar x Ns + Ns Ar y ,
where
.Ar x
and
.Ar y
are integers.
.Ar x
is the first timeout and
.Ar y
is the second one: all suitable addresses for
.Ar host
are first tried with a timeout of
.Ar x
seconds, and if all of them fail, then they are tried again with a
timeout of
.Ar y
seconds.
(Be aware that the timeout specified with the
.Fl t
option overrides everything.)
By default,
.Ar x
is 2 and
.Ar y
is 58.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Ar prog...
is run with the following variables set:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ev PROTO
Always set to TCP.
.It Ev TCPREMOTEIP
Set to the chosen IP address of
.Ar host .
.It Ev TCPREMOTEPORT
Set to
.Ar port .
.It Ev TCPREMOTEHOST
If the
.Fl H
option has been given, set to the name obtained by a reverse DNS
resolution of the IP address chosen for
.Ar host .
Else unset.
.It Ev TCPLOCALHOST
If the
.Fl l
option has been given, set to
.Ar localname .
Else set to the name obtained by a reverse DNS resolution of the IP
address chosen for the local host.
.It Ev TCPREMOTEINFO
If the
.Fl r
option has been given, set to the information given by an IDENT server
on
.Ar host
about the current connection (very unreliable).
Else unset.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-tcpserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver4 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver4-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver4d 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver6 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver6-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver6d 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/proto/ucspi.txt
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-networking/s6-taiclient.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
